So today we're going to take a trip Once
Around The Crab Nebula and there's this
rather nice little animation showing the
expanding shock wave of material from
this exploded
star so this was first uh accurately
observed and drawn by William Parson
third Lord Ross in Ireland with the
Leviathan of Parson town which is this
enormous uh reflecting telescope built
between these peers here must have been
very very cumbersome to use but in 1844
he was able to observe the Crab Nebula
and he produced this diagram which um I
really can't see a crab but uh that's
the name that was given to it so who are
we to
argue now it was later noted that the
Chinese had observed what they called a
best star in the sky in the year 1054 a
at the same location and of course these
two are related this was a star that had
exploded and become very very bright the
Chinese records record seeing it in
broad daylight for three months before
then it gradually became a nighttime
object and after a total of nine months
faded from View and of course what it
was was that it was a supernova an
exploding star became very very bright
indeed just for the first few moments
after this star had exploded and started
to hurl its outer layers all across the
cosmos and uh what we see now of course
in the same position is the remains of
that expansion of material being hurled
outwards with the amazing colors that
you see there it was Ed across the world
the 13th century manuscript megate suuki
from Japan mentions a guest star as well
so uh seen there in
Iraq in
1978 a reference was found in a 13th
century copy of an older work by uh
botlan who was a historian Christian
physician living in Baghdad at the time
talking about this event
in Europe the Holy Roman Empire Emperor
Henry III is depicted here pointing up
at this new star in the sky the same
event and over in North America there's
rock art a Petroglyph there's a hand
print and the cresant moon and a very
bright star and actually you can trace
some of the other stars as well in and
around that have been mapped on the uh
Rock there and the phase and position of
the Moon compared to those stars and
compared to the the very bright object
matches up perfectly with the 5th of
June 1054 so we think this is a record
of the event as
well so what do we know about the Crab
Nebula well these are somewhat difficult
to pin down the distance but this
marvelous photograph here from the
Liverpool telescope shows uh a very good
picture of it 6,300 light years away 5
and 1 Half Light Years along the long
axis of the somewhat elliptical uh view
that we have there and by trying to
estimate how much gas there is there by
looking at the light and the Spectrum um
and estimating the density and the
volume you can estimate that there's two
to three solar masses of material in the
nebula itself it's surprisingly hot
still somewhere from 11 to 18,000
degrees Kelvin so from a very very hot
start it's cooling but even a thousand
years later it's still at this very very
high temperature and uh you can get an
estimate of the density so 1,300
particles per cubic cm is a pretty good
vacuum actually so there's really quite
thin now the animation shows it
expanding um that's actually slightly
faked but it gives the idea
the uh material is still moving out from
the center and we can measure that with
the Doppler shift and get a reading of
1500 kilm per second just under a, miles
per second that's really quite fast and
if you back calculate that to uh when uh
it was Zero size then it agrees with
this origin in 1054
so what happened where did it come from
well the question really is what type of
star blew up was it the explosion of a
white dwarf star and as depicted in the
top right hand corner we've got a white
dwarf star creting material off a red
giant companion perhaps these two were
formed as a binary pair uh with these
slightly different masses the heavier of
the two evolved through the red giant
phase and became a white dwarf and now
the less lower Mass one is swollen up to
be a giant and is losing control of its
outer layers which are flowing over onto
the white dwarf and that will overload
it and cause it to explode as a type 1A
Supernova or was it a massive star one
of these enormous stars that is many
times larger than our sun and will fuse
its way through all the elements
creating an iron core and eventually
detonating as a type 2
Supernova it can't be a small star less
than about eight times the mass of the
Sun they don't die as supern noi they
puff off their outer layers as planetary
nebula so for the white dwarf this is
the idea that uh the binary system is
highly evolved the white dwarf is now
Ste stealing material from its swollen
companion and eventually the material
will build up and up and up to the point
where the white dwarf can't take it
anymore and what you get is the one of
these type 1A supern noi there's one
shown here that a Bright point of light
at the bottom that is an exploding white
dwarf and it's outshining the entire
galaxy that it's a member
of very bright indeed what happens is
that the white dwarf acquires more than
1.44 solo masses and that exceeds a
limit called The chandraa Limit where
the electrons would have to end up with
moving faster than the speed of light
and that's not possible so uh you end up
with the electrons being rammed into the
protons um neutrons being formed and
this triggers a cataclysmic explosion of
the white dwarf star tears itself apart
completely and because the entire star
is destroyed they always blow up with
the same uh Power output that makes them
very useful in other ways as standard
candles but when we look at a type 1 a
supernova we get a standard light curve
from them they always blow up with the
same Peak
intensity and then they Decay quite
quickly and then there's a
characteristic
knuckle where things flatten out and
they Decay more slowly and this is all
due to the decay of radioactive isotopes
that get made in the explosion of the
star so the the decay of nickel occurs
very rapidly at the top and then the
longer tail is caused by Cobalt which de
decays more
slowly whereas a massive Star as we've
said will burn through its life cycle so
we have the life cycle for a 25 solar
mass star here where it's uh going all
the way through burning hydrogen for
about 7 million years making helium
helium to carbon half a million years
carbon 600 years neon one year oxygen 6
months and silicon burning to create
iron just buys it one extra day before
gravity takes over and when that happens
they can't liberate any more nuclear
fusion energy so they uh can't resist
the crush of GRA gravity and the core of
the star collapses very rapidly just in
a few milliseconds the core of iron is
crushed and a huge burst of energy
erupts outwards tearing the star apart
leading to one of these supern over
explosions and what happens is that as
the outer layers are blasted away the
electrons are crushed into the protons
making neutrons and the result is a
neutron star and we think that uh we can
detect the spinning neutron star in the
center what I've done here is overlaid
an x-ray picture on top of the Crab
Nebula showing the spinning neutron star
in the center where uh it's creating
huge pulses of energy these neutron
stars are just utterly extreme objects
they're about the size of a city so
about 12 kilometers uh somewhere between
1.4 and 2.1 solar
masses um the surface gravity is a
million million times as strong as our
Earthly Gravity the temperature a
million million degrees and that makes
the density a billion billion kilograms
per cubic meter for these tiny objects
they are the density of an atomic
nucleus right on the outer layer though
they probably have a crust of iron and
metal that uh gives them a very very
strong magnetic field so uh as they spin
around they can whip up the
electromagnetic radiation to
create uh pulses of radio waves and
other things that we can
detect but there is a limit again
they're only stable up to a few solar
masses around about two and a half to
three solar masses you find another
limit called the Tolman Oppenheimer
vulkov limit which is the maximum
mass that a neutron star can take in
fact as you increase the mass that you
have for your neutron star it will
shrink and get crushed down to a smaller
and smaller size until it reaches its
limit and when it does so it's all over
and the traditional story is that what
you get then is gravity Without Limits a
black hole is formed but that's another
story so the question really before us
is what have we got in The Crab Nebula
what lies at the heart of the crab and
you can see in another multi-wavelength
picture here this uh slight image of the
woring center there that is creating the
pulsar and if we have a look at the
Pulsar itself we can hear the radio
pulses coming at us every 33 millisecs
here we
go and that's the Pulses from the
Central pul side you see it spinning
away you see it flashing in the
stroboscopic picture in the middle lower
row there and the pulse is being
detected just incredible that this is
giving out all of these different
multi-wavelength flashes of light every
milliseconds so what do we what can we
uh figure out from all of this well
looking at the Spectrum of the light for
the
um nebula itself we can determine what
elements are present and what therefore
were made by the original progenitor
star that blew up and what we conclude
from this that is that it must have been
less than about 12 times the mass of the
Sun so more than eight or it would not
have exploded and less than 12 so most
likely a super an AGB star the Asm totic
giant Branch stars that have gone on
beyond the uh formation of helium in
their core created carbon and then gone
on to ignite the carbon and start
burning the carbon to produce somewhat
heavier
elements but it can't have been much
more massive than that because otherwise
even heavier elements would have would
have turned up in the nebula and we just
don't see them so this is the most
likely um and that this died at the end
of its life as an implosion and created
a type 2
Supernova well that's a good story but
is it
right the problem is that when we do the
sums we look to see how much mass there
is in the nebula if the progenitor star
was 8 to 10 solar
masses and the nebula only weighs in at
2 to
three and the neutron star is somewhere
between one and two in the middle then
we find that somewhere between uh three
and five can be accounted for in our
range of uh arithmetic there if we add
up the lower and upper estimates we get
somewhere between three and five solar
masses between the nebula and the
neutron star and so somewhere around
five solar masses seems to have gone
missing and the question is would this
have been blown away way uh early on in
the life of the star hurled into space
and has disappeared beyond the range of
the observations of the nebula that
seems a little bit difficult um we can't
find an outer shell of material that
would have been ejected uh early on
before the Supernova exploded uh as
might be the case with a very large star
sort of a wolf rette star or something
like that so there's a bit of a problem
and there's a second problem which is
that if we take the evidence from the
historical record of the star appearing
in late April or early May to begin with
and peaking in brightness in July at
magnitude -7 much brighter than Venus
was recorded similarly at Nega 4.2 at
the time
then look to the fact that it was
visible for maybe two years after the
first observation it just doesn't fit
it's far too bright to be a type 2
Supernova the type 1 A's are about 10
times the brightness of the type twos
and it also seems that it has that
characteristic knuckle shape there so
the top plot is the historical data
representing the uh facts that we know
about the observations of the uh 1054
Supernova and at the bottom we've got a
stylized rendition of what a type 1 a
looks like and the shape is about right
with the characteristic Peak and knuckle
Arrangement but this doesn't make sense
because a type 1 a supernova must have
come from the explosion of a white dwarf
destroying itself to nothing so how can
there be a neutron star rotating to
create the crab Pulsar there it just
doesn't quite seem to stack up and I
don't have an answer for you we haven't
figured this one
out there's one possibility which is
that it really was um uh all explainable
by the uh spinning down of the Pulsar
lighting up the ne making the whole
thing so bright but uh there are other
explanations like in fact there was a
neutron star there already and the type
1A Supernova blew up um coincidentally
in either in the line of sight or um in
the cloud itself at that time because
something blew up to propel the nebula
at that that stage so there's sort of
real mystery over all of this
and a third mystery associated with The
Crab Nebula was that we just detected
gamma rays incredibly strong gra gamma
rays 100 Terra electron volt gamma rays
coming from The Crab Nebula and we just
can't quite understand what is making
such enormously powerful
radiation so the Crab Nebula M1 the
first object in Charles messier's
catalog must have been observed by many
many people over the years um and we
thought we understood it but in fact
there are at least three different
problems that need to be solved still
this is one of the things I love about
the subject of astronomy that we don't
yet have all the
answers so thanks very much for
listening and I'll leave you with a
little look at this multi-wave length
combination of images of the Crab Nebula
showing what's going on inside